# GCNIA_Permutation_Thresholding

This repository provides the source code for the permutation modelling method for output threshold selection in
Gene-Coexpression networks.

Source code for performance analysis is contained in the Benchmark_Performance file.
The "Implementation" file contains the  function which:
1. Accepts an N x P gene expression matrix with N observations of P genes.
2. Generates independent variables by permuting observations of individual variables in the gene expression matrix.
3. Calls the MINET package to learn a weighted gene association network with one of ARACNE, CLR and MRNET.
4. Estimates a threshold according to the (1-alpha)th quantile of the distribution of associations learned between
permuted and original variables
5. Applies this threshold to generate a binary graph on the association matrix produced by MINET. 

PURPOSE:
Gene co-expression network inference algorithms, such as ARACNE and CLR, produce weighted network estimates.
Further thresholding of such networks is required to deliver adequate positive predictive value.
We select thresholds empirically by modelling the distribution of association weights between independently expressed genes. 
METHODS:
Independent gene expression variables were generated by concatenating the gene co-expression matrix with permuted variables.
Following inference on the augmented variable set, thresholds were selected to exceed the association weights between
original and permuted variables. Performance was evaluated with the NetBenchmark software.
RESULTS:
Selected thresholds returned networks which ranked highly in terms of F1 score against other potential thresholds
(mean F1_rank = 0.953, sd = 0.097, p = 1.5e-06). A large proportion of the maximal attainable F1 score was recovered in these networks
(mean F1_recovery = 0.643, sd = 0.24).
CONCLUSIONS:
Permutation modelling is a reliable threshold selection method for weighted gene association networks. 


References
1. 	Meyer PE, Lafitte F, Bontempi G. minet: A R/Bioconductor Package for Inferring Large Transcriptional Networks Using Mutual Information. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Dec 29;9(1):461. 
2. 	Meyer PE, Kontos K, Lafitte F, Bontempi G. Information-Theoretic Inference of Large Transcriptional Regulatory Networks. EURASIP J Bioinforma Syst Biol. 2007;79879. 
3. 	Faith JJ, Hayete B, Thaden JT, Mogno I, Wierzbowski J, Cottarel G, et al. Large-Scale Mapping and Validation of Escherichia coli Transcriptional Regulation from a Compendium of Expression Profiles. Levchenko A, editor. PLoS Biol. 2007 Jan 9;5(1):e8. 
4. 	Margolin AA, Nemenman I, Basso K, Wiggins C, Stolovitzky G, Favera RD, et al. ARACNE: An algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Mar 20;7(SUPPL.1). 







